.de ES
.sp
.in +0.5i
..
.de EE
.in -0.5i
.sp
..
.de EX
.sp
.in +0.5i
\\$1
.in -0.5i
.sp
..
.TH FTP.PROXY 1 "23 JANUARY 2003"
.SH NAME
ftp.proxy \- FTP proxy server
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBftp.proxy\fR [\fIoptions\fR] [\fIserver\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I ftp.proxy
is a proxy server for a subset of the file tranfer protocol described in
RFC 959.
It forwards traffic between a client and a \fIserver\fR without looking too much
if both hosts do real FTP.
The FTP server can be either given on the command line or supplied by the
client.
.PP
.I ftp.proxy
can be started from a TCP superserver like
.IR inetd (1)
or
.IR tcpproxy (1).
but can also bind to a TCP/IP port on it's own and run in standalone (or
daemon) mode.
.SS "Protocol Support"
.I ftp.proxy
supports the following FTP commands:
.PP
.RS
ABOR, ACCT, APPE, CDUP, CWD, DELE, FEAT, LIST,
.br
MDTM, MKD, MODE, NLIST, NOOP, PASS, PASV, PORT,
.br
PWD, QUIT, RETR, REST, RNFR, RNTO, RMD, SITE,
.br
SIZE, SMNT, STAT, STOR, SYST, TYPE, USER, XCUP,
.br
XCWD, XMKD, XPWD, XRMD
.br
.PP
.RE
Transfer of structured data is not
supported.
.SS "Command Parameters"
By default \fIftp.proxy\fR does not accept blanks in command parameters.
This is to protect your UNIX server against users who work on computers where
these things are usual.
.PP
To allow blanks the option \fB-b\fR must be given on the command line.
Notice that blanks at the beginning or end of the parameter are still
not supported.
.PP
The `SITE' is in neither case affected by this limitation, \fIftp.proxy\fR
accepts always blanks in `SITE' parameters.
.PP
The option -y enables \fIftp.proxy\fR to accept data connections from different
remote interfaces.
Try to avoid using this option, because it can cause
security problems (see HISTORY for details).
.SS "Server Selection"
If client-side server selection it turned on with the \fB-e\fR option
the user must select the FTP server he wants to use with
the `@' notation.
Instead of specifying the real ftp server on the command line the user
has to connect to
the gateway machine where \fIftp.proxy\fR is running and to enter the username
in the form
.EX \fIremote-user\fR@\fIremote-ftp.server\fR
The password that is send to the proxy server is the password required
for logging into \fIremote-ftp-server\fR with the account \fIremote-user\fR.
.PP
In situations where the FTP client doesn't support usernames containing
an `@' the percent sign `%' might be used for that.
.SS "Access Control"
If an access control program is given with the \fB-a\fR option on the command
line the connection data is passed to the acp before the server is contacted.
The acp should return 0 as exit code to grant access and another value to
deny.
.PP
The access controller receives the following variables:
.TP
\fBPROXY_INTERFACE\fR, \fBPROXY_PORT\fR
interface and port where the client is connected to the proxy.
.TP
\fBPROXY_CLIENT\fR, \fBPROXY_CLIENTNAME\fR
IP number an name of the connected client.
.TP
\fBPROXY_SERVER\fR, \fBPROXY_SERVERPORT\fR, \fBPROXY_SERVERNAME\fR
IP number, port and name of the FTP server the client wants to contact.
.TP
\fBPROXY_SERVERLOGIN\fR
the supplied username for the FTP server.
.TP
\fBPROXY_USERNAME\fR, \fBPROXY_PASSWD\fR
supplied username and password for usage of the proxy server.
.PP
The values for \fBPROXY_USERNAME\fR and \fBPROXY_PASSWD\fR are taken from
the supplied remote username and password if they contain a colon `:'.
In this case the local authentication data is taken from the left side of
the colon and the remaining right side is passed on to the server.
.PP
Furthermore the acp's stdout is connected to the FTP client and
it's stderr is read by \fIftp.proxy\fR which writes the acp's stderr output
to syslog.
.PP
Notice also that a non-zero acp exit code signals \fIftp.proxy\fR that
something's wrong and that \fIftp.proxy\fR should terminate.
.SS "Connection Translation"
Beginning with version 1.1.6 \fIftp.proxy\fR supports connection
translation programs (ctp's).
A ctp can completly overwrite the user's server selection and login.
If configured the ctp is called before the acp.
It receives the same environment variables like the acp and
returns server and login information that should \fIftp.proxy\fR
for the server connection on it's stdout.
The format of the ctp output lines is
.EX "\fIvariable\fR [\fB<whitespace>\fR]\fB=\fR [\fB<whitespace>\fR] \fIvalue\fR"
where \fIvariable\fR is one of
.PP
.RS
SERVERNAME, SERVERLOGIN, SERVERPASSWD, SERVERPORT 
.PP
.RE
and \fIvalue\fR the corresponding value.
Alternativly to these four variables you can use the shorter forms
.PP
.RS
SERVER, LOGIN, PASSWD, PORT 
.PP
.RE
as variable names.
Furthermore the case of the variable names doesn't matter and any whitespace
around \fIvalue\fR is ignored.
.PP
The ctp can deny the proxy request by exiting with an non-zero exit code,
In which case \fIftp.proxy\fR drops the connection immediately.
Alternativly the ctp can also print a line starting with \fB-ERR\fR,
which is written to syslog before the connection is closed.
.SS "Command Control"
If a command control program (ccp) is given with the \fB-c\fR option this
program is called for the FTP commands
.PP
.RS
APPE, CDUP, CWD, DELE, LIST, MDTM, MKD,
.br
NLST, RETR, RNFR, RNTO, RMD, SIZE, STAT,
.br
STOR, STOU, XCUP, XCWD, XMKD, XRMD
.br
.PP
.RE
The ccp returns an exit code of 0 to grant and any other to deny access (the
exit code to the `QUIT' command is ignored).
For the ccp the same variables as for acp's are set with the addition
of
.TP
\fBPROXY_COMMAND\fR, \fBPROXY_PARAMETER\fR
FTP command and parameter (if set).
.TP
\fBPROXY_SESSION\fR
a unique identifier for the proxy session.
.TP
\fBPROXY_CCPCOLL\fR,
the client's number of collisions with the ccp's permission rules (number
of `permission denied' responses).
.PP
The ccp's stdout and stderr are connected to \fIftp.proxy\fR.
A one line message written to stdout by the ccp goes to syslog, while
a message one stderr is sent to the client.
If this message does not contain a status \fIftp.proxy\fR substitutes a
`553' code.
If the message is empty the client gets a simle `553 permission denied'.
Notice that the stderr message is only used if the ccp returns an exit code
other the zero.
.PP
On normal program termination (`QUIT' command or timeout) the ccp is called
with the command `+EXIT' to do some final clean up.
It is not reliable that the ccp receives the `+EXIT' event.
There are lots of possiblities that the proxy terminates without generating
it, e.g. client timeout, server error or signal reciption by the proxy.
.SS "Monitor Mode"
The \fB-m\fR option puts \fIftp.proxy\fR into the monitor mode.
\fIftp.proxy\fR will then try to keep track of the client's current directory
on the server side.
With this information the file parameter for the commands
.PP
.RS
APPE, CDUP, CWD, DELE, LIST, MDTM, MKD
.br
NLST, RETR, RNFR, RNTO, RMD, SIZE, STOR,
.br
XCUP, XCWD, XMKD, XRMD
.br
.PP
.RE
is converted into an absolute path.
This value is then used in syslog messages and given to a ccp in the
\fBPROXY_FTPPATH\fR variable.
Furthermore the variable \fBPROXY_FTPHOME\fR contains the user's initial
directory which is assumed to be his home directory.
.PP
The `LIST' and `NLIST' command may have a parameter or not.
If it is absent \fiftp.proxy\fR sets the parameter to `*' but this
affects only the \fBPROXY_FTPPATH\fR variable, not the command that is sent
to the server.
.PP
For the `CDUP' command \fBPROXY_FTPPATH\fR contains the full path of the
target directory.
.PP
Monitoring may not work with all server systems since the output of the
`PWD' command which is used by \fIftp.proxy\fR to get the current directory
in not completely defined.
If the directory can not be clearly determined \fIftp.proxy\fR will
terminate.
.SH "CONFIGURATION FILE"
\fIftp.proxy\fR can take most of its command line options also from
a configuration file which can be set with the \fB-f\fR option.
.PP
The following options can be set:
.TP
\fBacp\fR \fI/path/to/acp\fR
sets the path to the access control program (\fB-a\fR option).
.TP
\fBallow-anyremote\fR yes|no
if enabled \fIftp.proxy\fR does not check the remote's end in data
connection, required for some bad multi-homed servers and FXP (\fB-y\fR
option).
.TP
\fBallow-blanks\fR yes|no
allows blanks in FTP command parameters (\fB-b\fR option).
.TP
\fBallow-passwdblanks\fR yes|no
allows blanks in the FTP login password (\fB-B\fR option).
.TP
\fBbind\fR \fIportnum\fR
sets the port number to which \fIftp.proxy\fR should bind to,
activates daemon mode (\fB-D\fR option).
.TP
\fBccp\fR \fI/path/to/ccp\fR
sets the path to the command control command (\fB-c\fR option).
.TP
\fBctp\fR \fI/path/to/ctp\fR
sets the path to the connection translation program (\fB-x\fR option).
.TP
\fBdebug\fR yes|no
turns debugging mode on or off (\fB-d\fR option).
.TP
\fImonitormode\fR yes|no
enables monitor mode (\fB-m\fR option).
.TP
\fIproxy-routing\fR yes|no
if enabled \fIftp.proxy\fR uses the last `@' in the username to determine
to which server it should connect.
This make proxy hopping (or routing) possible (\fB-u\fR option).
.TP
\fIselectserver\fR yes|no
enables client side server selection, disables the \fBserver\fR option
(\fB-e\fR option).
.TP
\fIserver\fR \fIftpserver\fR
sets the connection's FTP server, disables \fBselectserver\fR.
.TP
\fIserverlist\fR \fIlist-of-allowed-server\fR
specifies a command separated list of servers to which the clients are
allowed to connect (\fB-s\fR option).
.TP
\fIsourceip\fR \fIip-number\fR
defines the IP address for the outgoing control connection to the remote
server, which also determines the local IP address for data transmissions.
.TP
\fItimeout\fR \fItimeout\fR
set the timeout in seconds.
.TP
\fIxferlog\fR \fIfilename\fR
sets the location of the xferlog file and enables xferlog logging.
.PP
Notice that the file can contain comments and blank lines (usual UN*X-style)
but \fIftp.proxy\fR terminates immediately with an error code if an
unknown or invalid configuration option is found.
.SS "Interface specific configurations"
\fIftp.proxy\fR's configuration file supports interface specific configuration
sections.
Such section begin with a line that starts with
.TP
[\fIinterface-ip\fR]
.PP
followed by the configuration options for connections on this specific
interface.
\fIftp.proxy\fR checks for such sections immidiately after the client
connection is accepted.
If it finds at least one interface specific section in the configuration
file but none for the current interface it considers itself to be not
configured for it and drops the connection sending a `421 not available'
message to the client.
.PP
\fIftp.proxy\fR accepts all global configuration options from
above (allthough not all make sense, e.g. \fBbind\fR) in interface specific
section.
That is, \fIftp.proxy\fR can have completely different configurations on
different interfaces.
But to deactivate a non-boolean option, e.g. \fBctp\fR you can not simply
give the option without a value, this would be considered as `bad
configuration option'.
Instead you must supply a single dash `\fB-\fR' to clear an option.
.SS "Configuration checking"
\fIftp.proxy\fR prints an error message and terminates immediately if it finds
an unknown or bad configuration option.
More worse, these error messages are printed to \fIftp.proxy\fR's stderr
and not to syslog which makes it a little bit difficult to observe.
\fIftp.proxy\fR addresses this issue by supporting the \fB-F\fR option.
.PP
The \fB-F\fR option sets the configuration file and the `check-and-print'
option, that is \fIftp.proxy\fR will only read, check and print it's
configuration options as they are set after reading the configuration.
An interface IP-number may be given as optional command line parameter
to make \fIftp.proxy\fR print the configuration for this particular
interface.
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are available:
.TP
\fB-a\fR \fIacp\fR
specify an access control program that grants or denies access via
\fIftp.proxy\fR.
.TP
\fB-b\fR
allows blanks in filenames.
.TP
\fB-B\fR
allows blanks and other special charackters in passwords. 
.TP
\fB-c\fR \fIccp\fR
sets a command control program that grants or denies the usage of FTP
commands through \fIftp.proxy\fR.
.TP
\fB-d\fR
enter debug mode, the communication between server and client is written
to stderr.
.TP
\fB-D\fR \fIport\fR
run \fIftp.proxy\fR in daemon mode.
.TP
\fB-f\fR \fIconfigfile\fR
sets \fIftp.proxy\fR's configuration file.
.TP
\fB-F\fR \fIconfigfile\fR [\fIinterface\fR]
read and print the proxy configuration for \fIinterface\fR from
\fIconfigfile\fR.
If \fIinterface\fR is missing the global configuration is printed.
This is a check-only option, after the configuration has been printed
\fIftp.proxy\fR terminates, no connection handling is done.
.TP
\fB-e\fR
enable client-side server selection.
With this option the \fIserver\fR argument isn't accepted.
.TP
\fB-l\fR
sets logging of most of the FTP commands.
.TP
\fB-m\fR
sets the monitor mode.
.TP
\fB-p\fR \fIport\fR
tell \fIftp.proxy\fR to use \fIport\fR as source port for data
transfers (using port number 20 is FTP standard).
Keep in mind that port numbers below 1024 require root permissions.
.TP
\fB-q\fR \fIsourceip\fR
sets the IP number for the outgoing control connection.
.TP
\fB-s\fR \fIlist\fR
the FTP server selected by the client must match one of the pattern
from the comma separated \fIlist\fR.
The wildcards `*' and `?' can be used.
.TP
\fB-t\fR \fItimeout\fR
specify a different FTP timeout in seconds than the default of 900 (15 minutes).
.TP
\fB-u\fR
search for the last appearance of an '@' in the username. This allows the
use of usernames with a '@' in it. Be careful with this option, this can be
abused to do 'proxy hopping'!
.TP
\fB-v\fR \fIprefix\fR
set \fIprefix\fR as variable prefix for the variable passwd to the access
and command control program.
.TP
\fB-x\fR \fIctp\fR
set a connection translation program to overwrite the server and login
information supplied by the user.
.TP
\fB-X\fR \fIfile\fR
write xferlog loggin to \fIfile\fR.
.TP
\fB-V\fR
show version number
.TP
\fB-y\fR
allow any data ports on any remote interfaces (dangerous!).
.TP
\fb-z\fR \fIsize\fR
sets the amount of data in bytes ftp.proxy tries to read with one system call
from either the client or the server.
The default is 1024 bytes, valid values range from 1 to 4096.
Playing around with larger values than the default may increase the
proxy's data troughput.
.PP
.SH "SYSLOG"
\fIftp.proxy\fR reports to FTP log facility on linux and BSD systems and
Daemon log facility on other.
.SH "AUTHOR"
Andreas Schoenberg <asg@ftpproxy.org>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR inetd (1),
.IR tcpproxy (1),
.IR syslogd (8),
.IR syslog.conf (5).

